[FLINK-32475][docs] Add doc for time travel (#23109)
apache/flink: docs/content/docs/dev/table/sql/queries/time-travel.md

---
title: Time Travel
weight: 18
type: docs
---
<!--
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

# Time Travel

{{< label Batch >}} {{< label Streaming >}}

> `TIME TRAVEL` is an SQL syntax used for querying historical data. It allows users to specify a point in time, query the corresponding table data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Time travel` is a SQL syntax used for querying historical data. It allows users to specify a point in time and query the corresponding table data.
```

> <span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> Currently, `TIME TRAVEL` requires corresponding catalog that the table belongs to implement the {{< gh_link file="flink-table/flink-table-common/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/table/catalog/Catalog.java" name="getTable(ObjectPath tablePath, long timestamp)" >}} method。

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> Currently, `time travel` requires the corresponding catalog that the table belongs to implements the {{< gh_link file="flink-table/flink-table-common/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/table/catalog/Catalog.java" name="getTable(ObjectPath tablePath, long timestamp)" >}} method.
```

> 

Reviewer: Please add a desc for the time travel syntax just like other query pages.

```sql
SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TIMESTAMP '2023-07-31 00:00:00'
```

> ## Expression Description

Reviewer: `Expression Description` confuses me.  Just put it as `Limitation`?

> <span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> `TIME TRAVEL` currently only supports some constant expressions and does not support the use of functions or udf.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> `Time travel` currently only supports some constant expressions and does not support the use of functions or udf.
```

Reviewer: Also, I don't think it does not support all the use of functions or udf. From the test of `ExpressionReductionRulesTest`, I believe it can reduce some simple expression even with udf.

### Constant Expression

```sql
SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TIMESTAMP '2023-07-31 00:00:00'
```

### Constant Expression Addition and Subtraction

```sql
SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TIMESTAMP '2023-07-31 00:00:00' - INTERVAL '1' DAY
```

### Time Function or UDF (Not Supported)

When using UDF or functions, a valid timestamp cannot be generated due to limitations of the current framework, and an exception will be thrown when executing the following query.

```sql
SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TO_TIMESTAMP_LTZ(0, 3)
```

## Time Zone Handling

> By default, the data type generated by the TIMESTAMP expression should be TIMESTAMP type, while the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data type generated by the TIMESTAMP expression is TIMESTAMP type, but there's a special case in the time travel statement.
```

interface provided by Catalog is `getTable(ObjectPath tablePath, long timestamp)`.

> When executing the time travel statement, the framework will convert TIMESTAMP type time to LONG value based on the local time zone. Therefore, the results of the same time travel query statement may vary when queried in different time zones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When executing the time travel statement, the framework will convert the TIMESTAMP type to the LONG type based on the local time zone. Therefore, the results of the same time travel query statement may vary when queried in different time zones.
```

---
title: Time Travel
weight: 18
type: docs
---
<!--
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

# Time Travel

{{< label Batch >}} {{< label Streaming >}}

Time travel is an SQL syntax used for querying historical data. It allows users to specify a point in time, query the corresponding table data, and use the schema that corresponds to that time.

> <span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> Currently, `Time Travel` requires corresponding Catalog implement the {{< gh_link file="flink-table/flink-table-common/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/table/catalog/Catalog.java" name="getTable(ObjectPath tablePath, long timestamp)" >}} method。

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> Currently, `Time Travel` requires the corresponding catalog that the table belongs to implement the {{< gh_link file="flink-table/flink-table-common/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/table/catalog/Catalog.java" name="getTable(ObjectPath tablePath, long timestamp)" >}} method。
```

```sql
SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TIMESTAMP '2023-07-31 00:00:00'
```

## Expression Description

<span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> `Time Travel` currently only supports some constant expressions and does not support the use of functions or udf.

### Constant Expression

```sql
SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TIMESTAMP '2023-07-31 00:00:00'
```

### Constant Expression Addition and Subtraction

```sql
SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TIMESTAMP '2023-07-31 00:00:00' - INTERVAL '1' DAY
```

### Time Function or UDF (Not Supported)

When using UDF or functions, a valid timestamp cannot be generated due to limitations of the current framework, and an exception will be thrown when executing the following query.

```sql
SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TO_TIMESTAMP_LTZ(0, 3)
```

## Time Zone Handling

> By default, the data type generated by the TIMESTAMP expression should be TIMESTAMP type, while the 

Reviewer: Do we really need the implement details as it just a doc to user. I think we just should descibe the behavior for time travel with time zone handling.

distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

# Time Travel

{{< label Batch >}} {{< label Streaming >}}

The syntax of `time travel` is used for querying historical data. It allows users to specify a point in time and query the corresponding table data.

<span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> Currently, `time travel` requires the corresponding catalog that the table belongs to implementing the {{< gh_link file="flink-table/flink-table-common/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/table/catalog/Catalog.java" name="getTable(ObjectPath tablePath, long timestamp)" >}} method.

> 

Reviewer: nit: add a new sentence before the sql
`
The syntax with time travel clause is:
`

```sql
SELECT select_list FROM table_name FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF timestamp_expression
```

**Parameter Specification:**

> - `FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF timestamp_expression`：Used to query data before a specific point in time. `timestamp_expression` represents the historical time point you want to query. This can be a specific timestamp or a time-related expression, such as relative time or function, and this expression only applies to physical tables and not to views or subqueries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF timestamp_expression`：Used to query data at a specific point in time, the `timestamp_expression` represents the historical time point you want to query. The `timestamp_expression` can be a specific timestamp or a time-related expression that can be reduced to a constant, and this expression can only apply to physical tables and not to views or subqueries.
```

## Example

```sql
--use constant expression
SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TIMESTAMP '2023-07-31 00:00:00'

> --use expression with functions that can be reduced to constant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
--use expression with functions that can be reduced to a constant
```

SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TIMESTAMP '2023-07-31 00:00:00' - INTERVAL '1' DAY

> 

Reviewer: please remove these two blank lines..

```

## Limitation

> <span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> The `timestamp_expression` used in `time travel` only supports certain types of expressions, including constant expressions of type `TIMESTAMP`, addition and subtraction operations involving timestamps, as well as some partial built-in functions and UDFs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> The `timestamp_expression` used in `time travel` only supports certain types of expressions that can be reduced to TIMESTAMP constants, including constant expressions of type `TIMESTAMP`, addition and subtraction operations involving timestamps, as well as some partial built-in functions and UDFs.
```

When `UDFs` are used in a `timestamp_expression`, due to the limitations of the current framework,
some expressions cannot be directly converted into a `TIMESTAMP` constant during SQL parsing and an exception will be thrown.

```sql

> --use expression with functions thant can not be reduced to constant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
--use expression with functions that can not be reduced to a constant
```

SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TO_TIMESTAMP_LTZ(0, 3)
```

The corresponding exceptions are as follows:

```bash
Unsupported time travel expression: TO_TIMESTAMP_LTZ(0, 3) for the expression can not be reduced to a constant by Flink.
```

## Time Zone Handling

The data type generated by the TIMESTAMP expression is TIMESTAMP type, but there's a special case in the time travel clause.
When encountering the time travel clause, the framework will convert the TIMESTAMP type to the LONG type based on the local time zone.

> Therefore, the results of the same time travel query statement may vary when queried in different time zones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, the results of the same time travel query statement may vary in different time zones.
```

distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

# Time Travel

{{< label Batch >}} {{< label Streaming >}}

`Time travel` is a SQL syntax used for querying historical data. It allows users to specify a point in time and query the corresponding table data.
<span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> Currently, `time travel` requires the corresponding catalog that the table belongs to implements the {{< gh_link file="flink-table/flink-table-common/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/table/catalog/Catalog.java" name="getTable(ObjectPath tablePath, long timestamp)" >}} method.

> The `timestamp_expression` represents the historical point in time you're interested in. This can be a specific timestamp or an expression related to time, such as relative time or a function.

Reviewer: Please put the statement in `FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF timestamp_expression`：`

```sql
SELECT select_list FROM table_name FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF timestamp_expression
```

**Parameter Specification:**

- `FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF timestamp_expression`：Used to query data before a specific time point, this expression can only be applied to physical tables and not views or subqueries.

## Limitation

> <span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> The time expressions used in `time travel` only support `TIMESTAMP` constant expressions, `TIMESTAMP` addition and subtraction operations, as well as some built-in functions and UDFs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<span class="label label-danger">Attention</span> The `timestamp_expression ` used in `time travel` only support `TIMESTAMP` constant expressions, `TIMESTAMP` addition and subtraction operations, as well as some built-in functions and UDFs.
```

> ### Constant Expression

Reviewer: I feel like `Constant Expression` & `Constant Expression Addition and Subtraction` &
`Time Function or UDF (Partial Supported)` is a little of confused  in here.  The structure is not intuitive.  
Considering actually `TIMESTAMP '2023-07-31 00:00:00' - INTERVAL '1' DAY` is a udf expression,
I'd like put all of  into an `Example` part like 
```sql
#use constant expression
SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TIMESTAMP '2023-07-31 00:00:00'

# use expression with udfs that can be reduced to constant
SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TIMESTAMP '2023-07-31 00:00:00' - INTERVAL '1' DAY

```

Reviewer: Then we can put some of the statement in `Time Function or UDF (Partial Supported)` to `Limitation` part. WDYT?

```sql
SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TIMESTAMP '2023-07-31 00:00:00'
```

### Constant Expression Addition and Subtraction

```sql
SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TIMESTAMP '2023-07-31 00:00:00' - INTERVAL '1' DAY
```

### Time Function or UDF (Partial Supported)

> When `UDF` or `functions` are used in a `time expression`, due to the limitations of the current framework,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `UDFs` are used in a `timestamp_expression `, due to the limitations of the current framework,
```

some expressions cannot be directly converted into a `TIMESTAMP` constant during SQL parsing and an exception will be thrown.

```sql
SELECT select_list FROM paimon_tb FOR SYSTEM_TIME AS OF TO_TIMESTAMP_LTZ(0, 3)
```

The corresponding exceptions are as follows:

```bash
Unsupported time travel expression: TO_TIMESTAMP_LTZ(0, 3) for the expression can not be reduced to a constant by Flink.
```

## Time Zone Handling

> The data type generated by the TIMESTAMP expression is TIMESTAMP type, but there's a special case in the time travel statement.

Reviewer: For me, time travel is more like a clause then a statement:
```suggestion
The data type generated by the TIMESTAMP expression is TIMESTAMP type, but there's a special case in the time travel clause.
```

> When executing the time travel statement, the framework will convert the TIMESTAMP type to the LONG type based on the local time zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When encountering the time travel clause, the framework will convert the TIMESTAMP type to the LONG type based on the local time zone.
```
